IOLANTHE at Hogwarts - a Review (Mike Nash)

I was thrilled to bits to receive tickets (thanks to Jim Drew) to the
Hogwarts Academy Gilbert & Sullivan Society (HAGSS) production of
"Iolanthe", but I had a nice dilemma: it was the same night as Woodhouses
AOS's production of the same opera, in which I was playing the Lord
Chancellor. I wrote to Professor McGonagall by return owl, explaining my
predicament; the next day she wrote back, assuring me that it wouldn't be a
problem - I could come to Hogwarts, enjoy the show, and be back in time to
go on stage at Woodhouses. All I had to do was wait in the Woodhouses
dressing room on the evening of the performance and my transport would be
provided. How would it be possible, I asked myself, given that it would take
nearly three hours to get to London, and quite a few more for the Hogwarts
Express to travel from Kings Cross (Platform Nine-and-three-quarters) to the
school? I was still worrying about this when I was interrupted by a voice
behind me: "Mr. Nash!"

I turned and found I was looking at myself. I was too astonished to say
anything. The other me smiled, said "It's going to be a great show," and
handed me a teddy bear, dressed as the Lord Chancellor. Before my brain
could even form the question "What on Earth is going on?" the room began to
spin and I was rushing through space very, very fast.

The next thing I knew I was standing in a row of seats, looking down at an
open-air performing space on the grass outside Hogwarts Castle, in front of
the lake. I stood there for a few seconds, taking in the scene and trying to
get my breath back. Then an angry, upper-class voice behind me hissed, "Sit
down, you stupid Muggle!"

I hurriedly sat, turned and saw a stern, middle-aged wizard with long fair
hair. I mumbled an apology. The lady next to him (his wife, I assumed) said,
loud enough for me to hear: "I don't know why they allow Muggles to see
these performances, Lucius."

The wizard, in the same tone of voice, replied, "I agree, my dear. Muggles,
Mudbloods - they'll allow any sort into Hogwarts these days. I bet this
fellow's never travelled by Portkey before, or even knows what one is."

I was pretty angry, as you might expect, but I was determined that this
couple would not spoil my evening. Besides, what can you do when your
adversary could turn you into a guinea pig before you could turn round? I
turned to the couple sitting to my right. They appeared to be Muggles. I
introduced myself, and they told me that their daughter was playing Phyllis.
The boy on my left, holding a 35mm camera, overheard and said excitedly, "My
brother's in it too! He carries the Lord Chancellor's cloak!"

I'm used to pre-performance announcements which say "No flash photography or
video or audio recording is permitted" and "All mobile phones must be
switched off or set to silent". Tonight the announcement went, "Please would
no-one use their wands during the performance, and the uttering of curses is
strictly forbidden as this distracts the performers. Thank you."

The crowd broke into applause as Professor Dumbledore, the musical director,
took the conductor's podium. Silence fell. Anticipation rose. The "Iolanthe"
overture is my favourite overture of the canon, and I wondered how Professor
Dumbledore's magical orchestra of unusual instruments, without human
players, would cope. It did not disappoint. From the opening bars I was
transported to Fairyland. A faultless rendition, full of sensitivity; a
delight from start to finish. If this was a taste of what was to come, it
would be a superb evening.

The chorus of fairies flew on, on their broomsticks which had been decorated
with little golden flowers. The choreography was performed in mid-air. Celia
(Parvati Patil) and Leila (Lavender Brown) sang clearly and pleasantly but a
little hesitantly, apparently with nerves. On the final sigh at the end of
the song they alighted and dropped to the ground. The dialogue went briskly,
Fleta (Cho Chang) getting most of the laughs. Professor McGonagall as the
Queen of the Fairies made an unexpected entrance, transforming from a cat
which had been on stage from the beginning. She played the part as, I
suppose, what she is: a firm but kind schoolmistress. I warmed to her
personality. She sang with resonance and without apparent effort.

Iolanthe (Ginny Weasley) appeared from the lake. I wondered how she had
managed to hold her breath under water for so long, as there had certainly
been no-one going into the lake since the start of the performance. The boy
next to me seemed to read my mind and whispered, "She's used Gillyweed!" I
looked carefully and just caught a glimpse of what looked like gills on the
side of her neck before they disappeared. Her costume was wet through and
covered in slime. "Poor girl," I thought. "They don't expect her to do half
of Act One in that state, do they?" She sang her opening bars with a touch
of nerves. As the chorus sang "Pardoned!", the Fairy Queen waved her wand
and Iolanthe's wet robes were transformed into an elegant blue gown, free
from slime and perfectly dry, as was Iolanthe herself. She broke into a
wonderful smile and from then on there was no holding her. She really was
the life and soul of Fairyland.

As Strephon entered the fairies in the chorus and the Queen made themselves
invisible, their faces becoming visible to sing "Yes, he's to be married
today!" and then vanishing again. Strephon was played by Ron Weasley with
confidence and strength, and a pleasing baritone voice. Naturally, as Ron
and Ginny are brother and sister it was believable that the characters were
related, and that Strephon looked a little older than his mother. He
delivered his dialogue with a good sense of comedy, injecting just enough
passion into his poetically emotional speeches without going over the top. I
was irritated that a group of pupils sitting in front of me (I guessed they
were Slytherins by their scarves) proceeded to giggle at all the references
to Strephon being half a fairy. Wizards and witches they might be, but I
couldn't stop myself from hissing "Shh!" I suppose that young witches and
wizards can be just as silly and immature as any other children.

Hermione Granger as Phyllis lit up the stage from her first entrance. She
sang well and moved gracefully. The dialogue that followed, which can fall
dreadfully flat, bubbled along, and the duet "None Shall Part Us" was sung
with tender feeling - there was a real chemistry between the two.

The entrance of the peers was just a little pork pie, but I liked it. There
was a small hut near the lake, like an outside toilet, clearly only big
enough to hold one person at a time. The door opened and all the peers
proceeded out of the hut, in single file. There was a good range of ages and
heights among the gentlemen's chorus, from small first years to tall seventh
years, and a few masters. The smallest peer of all was also the oldest -
Professor Flitwick. They paraded around the grass, singing strongly. Then
the Lord Chancellor (Harry Potter) made his entrance from the hut. I was
afraid there would be a dreadfully pork pie sound effect of a toilet
flushing but thankfully there wasn't. Potter was magnificent, commanding the
stage and giving us a Lord Chancellor who wasn't the feeble old fossil you
sometimes see in the role but a true authority figure, brimming with
self-confidence (when extolling his virtues as the embodiment of the law)
and self-doubt (when contemplating his position with respect to his wards).
His diction was impeccable. Colin Creevey as his train-bearer mimicked his
every move throughout his opening song in a way that was very amusing.
However, Potter's stage presence was such that he didn't let Creevey upstage
him. The boy next to me went wild with excitement. "There's my brother!
There he is!" and proceeded to take photo after photo. "Turn off the flash,"
I whispered to him. He did so and carried on taking pictures.

Lord Tolloller (Draco Malfoy) entered and delivered his first line in a
lazy, aristocratic drawl. The couple behind me, who had been so rude to me
earlier, applauded. His parents? Having been told that Malfoy had been
disappointing in roles in previous years, I was pleasantly surprised.
Perhaps Tolloller was more suited to his personality; at any rate, he seemed
quite at home as the condescending young earl. He sang "Blue Blood" with a
clear tenor voice as if he really meant it (although I must admit, I felt
his singing was a touch harsh - a mellower tone would have been easier on
the ear).

Mountararat was Professor Snape, and a more cynical Mountararat I've never
seen. When singing Phyllis' praises, he looked about as enthusiastic as a
turkey the week before Christmas. In a way, it was funny, but it was also
distracting. He sang acceptably enough and harmonised well with Malfoy, but
I would have liked to have seen a few smiles at appropriate moments.

There was an unusual bit of business in "When I Went To The Bar": another
Harry Potter entered, dressed identically to the first, and the song was
performed as a duet between the two Lord Chancellors, one (centre stage)
singing the beginning of each line and the other (next to Strephon at the
side) putting in "Said I to myself, said I" every time. On the last chord of
the song, one of the Chancellors waved his arm and the other vanished. A
nice touch.

The Act One Finale was performed with a lot of energy. Tolloller and
Mountararat in particular seemed to enjoy bullying Strephon - "But as he's
not his mother, it appears" was sung with a fair amount of venom. The Fairy
Queen and her band entered on their broomsticks once again. As Celia sang
"Our wrath, when gentlemen offend us, is tremendous", poor Professor
Flitwick was levitated fifteen feet up in the air. Then, an especially
spectacular effect. As she began her spoken recitative ("Every bill and
every measure"), the Fairy Queen pointed her wand at the sky, light flew
from it and a picture formed in the sky, depicting each scene she was
describing in succession. As she exclaimed, "Shall be attainable by
competitive examination!" the picture exploded into a shower of light,
raining down on the peers. The fairies flew off on their broomsticks at the
end of the Finale, the peers shaking their fists at them.

After a welcome drink of Butterbeer and a chocolate frog (I'd bought two,
but one of them hopped away), I settled down to watch Act Two. Very often,
when watching amateur productions of "Iolanthe", I try to spot which of the
peers in Act One is going to switch to playing Private Willis in Act Two,
but there was no chance of that this time: the sentry was none other than
Rubeus Hagrid, the school's gamekeeper and Care of Magical Creatures Master.
You couldn't imagine a more impressive guardsman, but then Hagrid is eight
feet tall, after all. He sang with total aplomb and got a good many laughs
for his solo, deservedly so. However I was a little distracted by his
bearskin: was it my imagination, or was it moving? And was that just a trick
of the light, or did I catch a glimpse of an eye in the middle of it?

Hagrid and Professor McGonagall made the most of their scene together,
leading up to "Oh Foolish Fay". Hagrid got a laugh from just about every
line he uttered, and the Hogwarts pupils in particular enjoyed hearing
Professor McGonagall say, "Here is a man whose physical attributes are
simply god-like!" The Fairy Queen's solo was delivered with much emotion and
received an enthusiastic response.

An extra surprise: Professor Snape sang the "De Belville" song, to what the
programme described as "the original music". How they managed to find it was
not revealed. Professor Snape sang it well, but I can see why it was cut. I
would have recorded it, but electronic devices don't work in the strong
magical field present in the school grounds. In the "George / Thomas" scene,
Snape's lugubrious, cynical demeanour, which had been somewhat irritating in
Act One, proved just right, and tempered Tolloller's bullish manner
perfectly. The line "We were boys together... at least, I was" from Malfoy
generated much laughter. Towards the end of the scene the pair drew their
wands and began a magical duel, which Snape was clearly going to win from
the start had Phyllis not interrupted them. How two British peers had
managed to learn magic wasn't explained. I suppose one could be a peer *and*
a wizard, or they may have picked up some tricks (sorry) from the fairies...
The quartet was nicely sung, with a strong low E flat from Hagrid, who then
dropped a full octave to the E flat over four leger lines below the bass
stave. The note was so powerful that the ground shook and Tolloller and
Mountararat lost their balance. Probably unintentional, but funny.

What can I say about the Nightmare Song, apart from a string of
superlatives? Potter, dressed in nightgown and nightcap, sang with the
clarity of an adult professional singer. The narrative of the dream was
played out in another sequence of pictures in the sky, which were very
funny. The eleven-year-old attorney from Devon in the pictures turned out to
be none other than my neighbour, the boy with the camera whose brother was
playing the Chancellor's attendant. He didn't appear to know it would be
him, and he almost fell off his seat with excitement. Potter received a long
ovation for this number.

Tolloller and Mountararat entered at the end of the song, as expected.
Mountararat's line "I am much distressed to see your lordship in this
condition" sounded like he meant the exact opposite. He and Tolloller
appeared to be trying to inflict something unpleasant on the Lord Chancellor
throughout the dialogue and the trio, but Potter was too quick, and dodged
every assault.

"If We're Weak Enough To Tarry" zipped along, well sung and well danced.
Ginny Weasley came into her own in the scene that followed. I was choking
back tears during "He Loves", as were the couple on my right. Even the silly
Slytherin children in front of me stopped fidgeting. When the moment in
which the Lord Chancellor recognises Iolanthe arrived, Time seemed to stop
dead. Potter and Ginny were totally believable - they *were* the Lord
Chancellor and Iolanthe and this *was* happening, right now. The fairies
were invisible as they sang "Willahalah, willaloo"; the sound appeared to
come from all around us. There was a look of genuine terror on the Lord
Chancellor's and Iolanthe's faces as the Fairy Queen raised her wand to
deliver the fatal blow, and a look of heart-torn pain on the face of the
Queen herself.

"Hold!" - and instantly the fairies and peers appeared, arm in arm.
Mountararat, as lugubrious as ever, got a huge laugh for his line "It's our
fault - they couldn't help themselves." Once again, Professor McGonagall and
Hagrid played their dialogue for as much comedy as they could. "Then away we
go to Fairyland!" and all the cast flew into the sky, in a formation which
wouldn't have looked out of place in a Red Arrows air display, Harry Potter
at the fore. A brief aerial ballet, then on the final chord everyone in the
cast raised their wands, pointed them in the air and the sky became a blaze
of glittering lights.

Potter received the biggest cheer of the evening, although every cast member
was warmly acknowledged. However I raised a special cheer for Ginny Weasley,
who I felt made one understand why Iolanthe is the title character.

Soon afterwards Hermione Granger joined her parents, accompanied by Harry
Potter and Professor McGonagall; Colin Creevey tailed close behind.
Professor McGonagall introduced me to them. I must admit, I was a bit
tongue-tied, but I managed to congratulate them. Professor McGonagall told
them, "Mr. Nash here is also playing the Lord Chancellor."

"Really? When?" asked Harry.

"About three hours ago," replied Professor McGonagall. I panicked at this
point, but she smiled and said, "We'll get you there on time, Mr. Nash,
don't worry." She then took out what looked like an egg-timer on a chain
around her neck, looped the chain around my neck also and turned the timer
over three times. There was a sensation like the world was being sucked
away. Suddenly we were in her office inside the castle. "It's now 7.15. Give
this to yourself when you get back." She opened a drawer in her desk. Inside
was a teddy bear, dressed as the Lord Chancellor. She motioned for me to
pick it up. I was pretty confused, but I did so. Instantly there was the
sense of rushing through space once again, and then I was back in
Woodhouses' dressing room, looking at my own back. I didn't appear to have
noticed me arriving.

"Mr. Nash!" I said to get my attention. The other me turned and stared at me
dumbly. "It's going to be a great show," I said, and handed the teddy bear
to my other self, who then vanished. It *had* been a great show, I thought
to myself. But now it's my turn. I got changed into my costume and waited
for the overture to start.

Mike Nash
"A twisted monster, all awry"

