RUDDIGORE at Hogwarts - a review (Jim Drew)

    It was an eager and intrepid band of Savoyards who met on platform nine
and three-quarters, King's Cross Station, to board the Hogwarts Express.
All were off to see the Hogwarts Players spring production of RUDDIGORE.
After a very pleasant journey, we settled happily into our seats in the
Great Hall.
    A great burst of cheering and applause greeted the appearance of
Professor Dumbledore, Headmaster of the school, tonight acting as Musical
Director.  A collective gasp of appreciation went through the audience as he
began the Overture.  The orchestra was an amazing collection of ancient
instruments (crumhorns, basset horns and serpents among the few I
recognized) which benefited greatly from the lack of actual musicians to
play them.  The Professor's baton technique was flawless, though throughout
the evening I found myself occasionally distracted by the glows, sparkles
and smoke emanating from its tip.
    The curtain rose on a very naturalistic scene, the glitter of real water
in Rederring Harbor.  Also seen therein by the discerning eye was the
occasional appearance of a giant squid, acting as a sort of Greek Chorus
behind the action of Act One.
    It is not my purpose here to give a character by character review of the
show.  Allow me, rather, to tell you a few of the actors and moments which
pleased me most.  Professor McGonagall was a most impressive Dame Hannah.
The images she produced in the air above the heads of the chorus during her
song about the witch's curse were chilling and most effective.  Miss
Hermione Granger was perfect as Rose Maybud--one could quite easily believe
that here was a girl who was never without a book in her hand!  Harry Potter
seemed a bit nervous at first as Robin Oakapple, but this played well into
the character as given us by the author.  Ron Weasley was a stylish and
animated Dauntless.  Mad Margaret was portrayed by Miss Trelwaney, Professor
of Divination.  It seemed to me that at times her mind wandered from the
action at hand, but perhaps this was a part of her characterization.
Professor Snape was, without doubt, the nastiest Despard I've ever seen.
    Act Two was spectacular.  Young Potter's transformation into Sir Ruthven
was striking, the scar on his forehead shading into a lightning bolt of
white hair.  Draco Malfoy's performance as Old Adam, I'm sad to report, was
the only major disappointment of the evening.  I got the impression that
here was a young man who would much rather be elsewhere, doing--anything
else.  The act was saved, however, by the entrance of the Ghost's Chorus.
All were played by real ghosts.  I recognized the Bloody Baron, Professor
Binns, and Peaves among the crowd of the deceased.  It was refreshing to see
the ghost scene without the annoyance of stage machinery.  The Ancestors
stepped down, not from their frames, but directly from the canvases!  Nearly
Headless Nick was a great Sir Roderic.  An elaborate Spanish ruff hid the
cause of his demise--until, I fear, his final bow.  I found myself wanting
to see this ghost play Pish-Tush.  To hear him deliver the line, "One might
succeed in cutting it half off--that would be something"--well, the
imagination boggles.  The highlight of the evening (for me, at least) was
Roderic's line, "YOU--GO--A-WAAAAY!" whereupon Ruthven instantly
Disapparated to the back of the house, where his faint "Yes, Uncle" was met
by amazement and hilarity by all.  I should also mention the lovely
interpolated interpretive dance during Hannah and Roderic's duet.  Pansy
Parkinson as the little flower and Rubeus Hagrid as the great oak made a
very moving and effective moment out of what was most likely a bad idea to
start with.
    I'm afraid it's too late to see the show again this year, but keep
alert--they're talking of either SORCERER or IOLANTHE for next year!

Regards,

Jim Drew

