THE SORCERER at Hogwarts - a review (Jim Drew)

         I freely confess that I was in a foul mood when our little group
 arrived at Hogwarts Academy to see the new production of The
 Sorcerer.  One of my companions on the train had slipped me a
 particularly nasty-tasting jellybean.  The taste cannot be described in a
 polite web group.  By the time we took our seats I was still suffering
 the dreadful effects of this contemptible confection and looking about
 for a private spot to which I might repair, if worse came to worse,
 should the need came to purge my system of its vile effects.  Suffice it
 to say that the prospect of actually having a good evening and enjoying
 the show was the last thing on my mind.  I must, in honesty, report that
 my seat mates were taking entirely too much pleasure from my
 predicament.  Happily, I can here attest that the quality of the
 production and the startling events at the conclusion of the proceedings
 (about which, more later) put all thought of my dilemma far from my
 consciousness.  The brimming, frosty mug of butterbeer I'd obtained from
 the concessionaire didn't hurt either.

         The south lawn of the Academy had been transformed into a theatre
 for the occasion, seats having been placed on a small hillside, a roomy
 stage constructed at the base of the incline and the whole covered by a
 sort of magical bubble, transparent to the evening sky.  Whether by plan
 or by serendipity, twilight and nightfall arrived just in time to suit
 Gilbert's stage directions.  A charming section of the Academy's exterior
 stood in for the Marmaduke mansion.

         This natural amphitheater was filled to the imaginary rafters
 with students, parents and local townspeople.  A holiday atmosphere
 prevailed, the main pre-show diversion seeming to be the simultaneous
 singing of all four Hogwarts House Songs.  I'd never noticed before, but
 the four tunes fit together wonderfully, reminding me of dear Sir
 Arthur's successes in contrapuntal tune combination so conspicuous in
 most of his operas.

         The orchestra pit was filled with the same motley collection of
 ancient instruments I'd previously noted in reviewing last year's
 Ruddigore.  As reported at that time, it seemed unlikely that such an
 ill-assorted hodgepodge of shawms, sackbuts, serpents and whatnot could
 ever produce a sound approaching Sir Arthur's intentions.  Again,
 Professor Dumbledore confounded all expectations when he struck up the
 Overture with this musicianless ensemble.  We could have been listening
 to the finest band in London!

         The most fervent Gilbert and Sullivan fundamentalist will have
 little to fear from this review.  I can assert that there was not much in
 the production to which even the most conservative sad anorak could take
 exception.  Line or lyric changes were at a minimum (to be reported in
 their proper place) and magical goings-on were mostly limited to the
 Incantation Scene and the Finale.

         The opening chorus reassured all of us that the music was in good
 hands with this young and energetic ensemble.  Constance (Moaning Myrtle) 
and Mrs Partlet (Hermione Granger) were charming and fully in character, 
bringing out the poignancy of their recitative and song.  Ron Weasley made 
a good impression as well with his impersonation of Doctor Daly.  He has a 
good, carrying voice and gave a fine accounting of both the music and the 
character of the vicar.  An amusing bit of magical "pork-pie" was allocated 
to the Minuet scene: whenever the good
Doctor opened his mouth to speak his little ode to Alexis' future, the
music came seemingly from out of nowhere.  After several false starts, the actors 
looking about for the source of the sounds, they eventually seemed to accept the 
strange situation and plowed through with good grace.

	Draco Malfoy was a strange choice for Alexis.  I'd always scoffed at the
notion (popular in this forum) that this character might be the villain of the 
piece, but Malfoy's interpretation made me think again.  Even the most 
innocent-seeming line dripped, in his delivery, with sarcasm and cynicism.  
His first line, "Oh, rapture", on being told his bride approached, was typical 
of his conception of the part; one can't imagine a less rapturous delivery than 
the one he gave us.  His later soliloquy on the working classes was almost 
offensive in its tone, his attitude toward the less fortunate not even rising to 
the level of condescension.  The lovely Cho Chang was a brilliant Aline.  Her 
beautiful voice and striking good looks soon had the audience (at least the male 
half) in the rosy palm of her dainty little hand.  Strangely, Malfoy showed little 
physical warmth toward her except in the scenes that included Harry Potter's John
Wellington Wells.  I got the idea that there was some private hidden
agenda at work here.

         Nearly Headless Nick and Professor McGonagall assayed Sir
 Marmaduke and Lady Sangazure.  Their duet necessitated a great deal of
 bowing and those of us who had the good fortune of having witnessed
 Nick's portrayal of Sir Roderick in last season's Ruddigore were all a
 bit nervous that there might be a repeat of the unfortunate incident that  
occurred during that show's final bows.  I am relieved to report that the late 
thespian kept his head about him at all times.

         Rubeus Hagrid undertook the dual roles of the Notary in Act One
 and the Old Man in Act Two.  His rich, deep voice was most
 impressive.  One got the impression he easily could have sung those low
 notes below the bass staff even an octave lower than they were written!

         The small role of Hercules was undertaken with sly wit by Dobby, an impish 
creature who thoroughly amused the audience with the droll subtext he managed to convey 
in his three short lines.

         Harry Potter's J. W. Wells was a complete delight.  At his first entrance we 
saw nothing but the Sorting Hat, floating about the stage in mid-air, much to Aline's 
discomfort.  Her "Good day, sir" and Alexis' "Good day--I believe you are a sorcerer" 
were spoken to the Hat--whereupon Potter, with a flourish, removed his Cloak of 
Invisibility to reveal Wells, dressed and made-up to resemble Mister Ollivander, 
purveyor of wands in Diagon Alley!  During the subsequent discussion of the stock and 
services available at the old-established firm, the Sorting Hat kept giving Wells cues 
as to what was obtainable in what quantities and at what prices.  It was obvious to all 
which of the two actually ran the shop.  Wells' patter song was actually a duet with the 
Hat, who took the refrain at the end of each verse, the words having been revised to:
         "As for quality second to none,
         You'll find it stacked up by the ton,
                 If you'll only look in
                 On the resident djinn,
         Sixty Diagon Alley, West One!"

         The much-anticipated Incantation Scene did not disappoint.  As
 Wells called up his unearthly aid, ghosts, ghouls and goblins covered the 
transparent bubble surrounding the stage and auditorium, eventually
 obscuring the night sky.  As they sang their responses their heads
 penetrated the barrier.  The audience was surrounded by music as they
 sang, the effect much more impressive than the finest sound system in the
 most up-to-date cinema.  As Wells counted off, "One! Two! and Three!",
 first ghosts, then ghouls, then goblins descended through the air, down
 to the stage, and INTO the teapot!  A chilling effect that disconcerted
 more than one Muggle among the spectators.

         Next, in one of the more spectacular numbers of the evening, as
 the chorus hymned their paean to the forthcoming banquet (acquitting
 themselves quite nicely) the foodstuffs about which they sang magically
 appeared on the tables set up for the signing ceremony.  With each
 mention of eggs, ham, jam, mustard and cress, these items would appear
 out of nowhere until the formerly empty tables became groaning
 boards.  The delighted audience also learned just how rollicking and gay
 a bun and Sally Lunn could be!  I noticed that many in the audience
 received complimentary plates containing ham, egg and cress sandwiches,
 mustard on the side.  Suddenly we were in the milieu of dinner
 theatre!  Owing to the jellybean incident-I wasn't hungry.

         The act ended traditionally, the Teapot Brindisi being well sung
 by N. H. Nick and R. Weasley.

         Act two provided little to remark upon--other than how well
 everything went (until the Finale, of course).  The Country Chorus and
 Dance was notable in that a number of the supernatural beings from the
 teapot took a hand in assigning individuals to make up the mismatched
 couples.  Constance and the Oldest Citizen were a pair to behold--Moaning
 Myrtle can't be much over four feet in height, while Hagrid is well over
 eight feet tall!  The Duet between McGonagall's Lady Sangazure and
 Potter's Wells was also quite mirth-inducing; the sight of that
 dignified, well-respected professor wildly attempting to attract what we
 all knew to be a fourth year student--and his desperate attempts to fend
 her off--had the student contingent howling with glee.

         Now to the Finale!  Many of you may have already read accounts of
 what happened that night but I feel that I, as an eyewitness, may have
 insights that might have slipped the notice of reporters in the popular
 press.

         The entire audience was hoping, of course, that Alexis would,
 just this one time, be chosen to atone for the troubles of the
 play.  But, no!  Wells was the scapegoat as usual.  He sang his line, "I
 go--it matters not with whom--or where" and prepared to climb over the
 lip of the well and descend to his fate.  The gong sounded from the
 orchestra and, to everyone's amazement, a bright flash accompanied by a
 towering plume of multi-hued smoke revealed Lord Vol - I mean,
 You-Know-Who!  "I've got you now, Potter!" he roared, bringing his wand
 to bear on the startled Harry.  The rest I can best relate in script
 form.  I believe that what I write here is reasonably accurate; I took
 notes directly after the occurrence and compared recollections with my
 companions.  If any of you readers have more precise information, I
 shouldn't be sorry to hear it!

POTTER:
Accio! (His wand appearing suddenly in his hand, he turns to face the foe)

Y-K-W:
(Brandishing his wand) Cruciatus!

POTTER:
(Blocking the pain spell) Serpensortia!

Y-K-W:
(Advancing on the boy and attempting to disarm young Potter) Expelliarmus!

POTTER:
(Desperately crying out the first thing to comes to mind) Locomotor Mortis!

Y-K-W:
Aaarrrggghh!! (His legs locking in a rigid position, he struggles to stay
in place)

DUMBLEDORE:
(Getting his attention) Harry!  Psst!  Harry!  (In a stage
whisper)  Rictusempra, Harry!  Rictusempra!

POTTER:
(A slow sunrise of a smile appearing, he turns to Lord V. and levels his
 wand)
Rictusempra!  Rictusempra!  Rictusempra!

(One at a time the entire cast joins in the chant, pointing at
You-Know-Who, who begins wildly writhing on the stage and helplessly
laughing under the spell of this tickling charm.  Before long the entire
audience has joined in the mantra.  Draco Malfoy is the only person
missing, having disappeared with the plume of smoke.  The gong sounds
again from the orchestra, quieting the tumult on stage and in the house.)

         "Deletrius!" says Dumbledore, causing You-Know-Who to vanish.
 "Tarentallegra!" Dumbledore cries as he strikes up the orchestra, causing
 all within the sound of his voice (audience included) to start a wild
 dance in time to the music of the Finale.

         Having no Alexis on stage, Aline is paired up for the final dance
 and tableau with J. W. Wells, who looks more than pleased at the
 unexpected reprieve from his sentence, the complete (if temporary)
 vanquishing of his deadly enemy, and at being paired with the lovely Miss
 Cho--who doesn't appear to be at all displeased herself!

         Whatever curtain call had been planned for the production was
 evidently forgotten in the high-spirited celebration that followed.  When
 the curtain rose again, Harry was on the shoulders of the male chorus,
 being carried about the stage and down through the audience, subjected to
 rhythmic clapping and the loud shouting of "Harry Potter!  Harry
 Potter!"  Smiling abashedly and waving at the adoring assembly, the young
 hero made his exit at the back of the house and left us all to quiet our
 overtaxed nerves as best we might.  It took several days for this
 reporter to become calm enough to give you this account--which I trust
 has not disappointed.  Rest assured that, come what may, I'll not miss
 next year's Iolanthe!

JIM DREW
(The Resident Jim)


(lightly edited by Eric Peterson)